Skill for Running Python Tests (#72253)
project-chip/connectedhomeip: .agents/skills/python-test-runner/SKILL.md

```

#### Example B: All Clusters App Test
```bash
./scripts/tests/run_python_test.py \
  --factory-reset \
  --app ./out/linux-x64-all-clusters-clang/chip-all-clusters-app \
  --app-args "--discriminator 1234 --KVS kvs1" \
  --script src/python_testing/TC_GC_2_2.py \
  --script-args "--storage-path admin_storage.json --commissioning-method on-network --discriminator 1234 --passcode 20202021 --endpoint 1"
```

---

## Running Tests: Method 3 (Two Terminals)

This method is useful for interactive debugging, allowing you to monitor the application's stdout logs side-by-side with the test script runner.

### Step A: Start the Example Application
In one terminal, run your locally built application binary:

```bash
./out/linux-x64-all-devices-clang/all-devices-app \
  --device contact-sensor \
  --discriminator 1234 \
  --KVS kvs1
```

### Step B: Run the Python Test Script
In a second terminal, run the python script after activating the Python virtual environment:

```bash
source out/venv/bin/activate

python3 src/python_testing/TC_IDM_2_3.py \
  --storage-path admin_storage.json \
  --commissioning-method on-network \
  --discriminator 1234 \
  --passcode 20202021 \

>   --PICS src/app/tests/suites/certification/ci-pics-values"

Author: Done

---
name: python-test-runner
description: >-
    Guidelines and instructions for building prerequisite example applications
    and running python-based integration and certification tests located in
    `src/python_testing/`. Use this skill when needing to build test-specific
    example apps or when executing python test scripts (manually or via helper

>     scripts like run_python_test.py and local.py).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `src/python_testing/`. Use this skill to run important regression tests during developement or, 
    when building new example apps, or when there is a need to execute python test scripts or
    "certification test scripts"  or mentions of run_python_test.py and local.py.
```

---

# Python Test Runner

This skill provides expert guidelines for running Python-based integration and
certification tests located in `src/python_testing/`.

## Prerequisite 1: Activating the Python Environment

> Before running any Python tests, you must compile and activate the project's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before running any Python tests, you must compile (if one doesn't exist in out/) and activate the project's
```

Python virtual environment.

> [!IMPORTANT] Different runner methods may expect different virtual

> > environments. The modern local runner script (`local.py`) hardcodes `out/venv`

Reviewer: local.py is a bad name. It should be "run_local_tests.py"

Author: I can rename in a follow-up as this would make edits in a few places, will leave this PR just for the skill

> as its Python environment. Ensure you compile and activate this specific
> folder:

```bash

> ./scripts/build_python.sh -i out/venv

Reviewer: This may omit important arguments. The build_python.sh should by default disable IPv4 at the very least.

Author: Added argument for IPv4 and note for the --help argument to view more options

    stdout/stderr.
-   **`--skip`**: Excludes specific test names or patterns from running.
-   **`--include-nightly`**: Includes slow nightly tests that are skipped by
    default.
-   **`--keep-going`**: Instructs the runner to continue executing subsequent
    tests even if a previous test in the queue fails.
-   **`--help`**: View the help dialog for more information.

---

## Running Tests: Method 2 (Combined Runner)

This uses the `run_python_test.py` script directly to manage starting the app,
running the test, and collecting logs. Unlike `local.py`, you must explicitly
provide all arguments since it does not read metadata blocks from the files.

### Combined Runner Template

With the Python environment active:

```bash
./scripts/tests/run_python_test.py \
  --factory-reset \
  --app {path_to_compiled_app_binary} \
  --app-args "{app_arguments}" \
  --script {path_to_python_script} \
  --script-args "{script_arguments}"
```

### Combined Examples

#### Example A: Contact Sensor (All-Devices) Test

```bash
./scripts/tests/run_python_test.py \
  --factory-reset \
  --app ./out/linux-x64-all-devices-clang/all-devices-app \

>   --app-args "--device contact-sensor --discriminator 1234 --KVS kvs1" \

Reviewer: Need to describe what "--KVS kvs1" does.

Author: Added this on line 147 where more arguments are outlined as well

  --script src/python_testing/TC_IDM_2_3.py \
  --script-args "--storage-path admin_storage.json --commissioning-method on-network --discriminator 1234 --passcode 20202021 --PICS src/app/tests/suites/certification/ci-pics-values"
```

#### Example B: All Clusters App Test

```bash
./scripts/tests/run_python_test.py \
  --factory-reset \
  --app ./out/linux-x64-all-clusters-clang/chip-all-clusters-app \
  --app-args "--discriminator 1234 --KVS kvs1" \
  --script src/python_testing/TC_GC_2_2.py \

>   --script-args "--storage-path admin_storage.json --commissioning-method on-network --discriminator 1234 --passcode 20202021 --endpoint 1"

Reviewer: The `--endpoint <N>` is relevant for most apps and tests

Author: Done

```

---

## Running Tests: Method 3 (Two Terminals)

This method is useful for interactive debugging, allowing you to monitor the
application's stdout logs side-by-side with the test script runner.

### Step A: Start the Example Application

In one terminal, run your locally built application binary:

```bash
./out/linux-x64-all-devices-clang/all-devices-app \

>   --device contact-sensor \

Reviewer: For all-devices-app, always provide endpoint number (e.g. `--device contact-sensor:1`)

Author: Done

---
name: python-test-runner
description: >-
    Guidelines and instructions for building prerequisite example applications
    and running python-based integration and certification tests located in
    `src/python_testing/`. Use this skill to run important regression tests
    during developement or,  when building new example apps, or when there is a

>     need to execute python test scripts or "certification test scripts"  or

Reviewer 2: Could probably teach it to run device basic composition tests and device conformance tests.

Reviewer 3: Leaving this for future updates.

    mentions of run_python_test.py and local.py.
---

# Python Test Runner

This skill provides expert guidelines for running Python-based integration and

> certification tests located in `src/python_testing/`.

Reviewer 2: Could also teach it to collect a data model dump by running the TC_IDM test that generates the files.

Reviewer 3: Leaving this for future updates.

> environments. The modern local runner script (`local.py`) hardcodes `out/venv`
> as its Python environment. Ensure you compile and activate this specific
> folder:

```bash
./scripts/build_python.sh -i out/venv --enable_ipv4 true
source out/venv/bin/activate
```

Be sure to check the arguments in the `build_python.sh` script before setting up
the virtual environment. Run the shell script with the `--help` argument to see
all available options that may be relevant for the tests.

---

## Prerequisite 2: Building the Example Application

Matter Python tests execute against a compiled device simulator application.
Before you can run any test locally, you must identify, map, and compile the
required application from source.

> [!NOTE] For many modern Python tests, the use of the **`all-devices-app`** is
> preferred, which allows simulating specific device type(s) on endpoints.
> However, many existing tests continue to use **`chip-all-clusters-app`**, and
> some domain-specific tests may require other specialized apps (e.g.,
> `chip-energy-management-app`).

### 1. Identify the Required Application

Open the Python test file (e.g., `src/python_testing/TC_FAN_3_3.py`) and locate

> the **`=== BEGIN CI TEST ARGUMENTS ===`** block near the top of the file. Under

Reviewer 3: should we mention the possibility of multiple runs? we may want to ask the user which run if more exists (or run all, which may need to run more applications.

-   **`--storage-path`**: Configures the file path where local state and
    credentials are persisted (e.g., `--storage-path admin_storage.json`).
    Providing this argument avoids state conflicts between concurrent runs.
    Defaults to `admin_storage.json` in the current working directory.
-   **`--commissioning-method`**: Specifies the method to use for commissioning
    (e.g. `on-network`). Because `chip-tool` and the python controller do not
    share credentials, the python script must commission the simulator target.
-   **Pairing Codes**:
    -   `--discriminator` (e.g. `1234`)
    -   `--passcode` (e.g. `20202021`)
    -   `--qr-code`
    -   `--manual-code`
-   **`--tests`**: Filters which test case(s) within the script to execute.
-   **`--PICS`**: Path to the PICS XML file or directory defining supported
    features.
-   **Custom Script Arguments (PIXITs)**: Used for passing custom config values
    to the script. Must be supplied in `key:value` format:
    -   `--bool-arg` (e.g. `--bool-arg pixit_name:False`)
    -   `--int-arg`
    -   `--float-arg`
    -   `--string-arg`
    -   `--json-arg`
    -   `--hex-arg`

---

> ## Running Tests: Method 1 (CI Meta Runner - Recommended)

Reviewer 3: should we recommend this? local.py is optimized to "run all tests" but this also means the build-apps will build a lot of things.

Reviewer 2: In my opinion this is the nicest way (once things are setup) as it runs what CI does!

You can always use `--test-filter {test_name}` to filter things out

Reviewer 3: My complaint is not about running (can be convenient) but compile being potentially very slow. Then again we can iterate.

compile and activate this specific virtual environment path before running the
command:

```bash
./scripts/build_python.sh -i out/venv --enable_ipv4 true
source out/venv/bin/activate
```

### Executing Tests

Use the `python-tests` subcommand and specify a filter using `--test-filter` to
target specific test suites:

```bash
./scripts/tests/local.py python-tests --test-filter {test_name}
```

### Mapping Apps using `--override-binary-path`

Because the script reads the CI blocks directly, it parses variables like
`app: ${ALL_CLUSTERS_APP}`. By default, it attempts to look for built binaries
in default output folders. If your compiled binaries are located in a
non-standard build path, you must map the CI variable to your local compiled
file using `--override-binary-path`:

```bash
./scripts/tests/local.py python-tests \
  --test-filter {test_name} \
  --override-binary-path {CI_APP_VARIABLE} {path_to_local_built_binary}
```

### Execution Example:

```bash
./scripts/tests/local.py python-tests \
  --test-filter TC_RR_1_1 \
  --override-binary-path ALL_CLUSTERS_APP out/linux-x64-all-clusters-no-ble/chip-all-clusters-app
```

> ### Notable Arguments for `local.py python-tests`

Reviewer 2: I believe there's also a `--app-filter`  if I remember correctly? That enables you to filter by both test name and app name.

For example, if you want to run all of the FAN tests only against the all-devices-app you could do something like `--test-filter TC_FAN --app-filter ALL_DEVICES`

Need to check if this still works

Reviewer 3: Thinking we can iterate on this once created. marking this as resolved so we have a v1 skill in.
